Add docs for the OpenTelemetry tracing (#31909)
keycloak/keycloak: docs/guides/server/tracing.adoc

The Jaeger UI might look like this with an arbitrary {project_name} trace:

image::jaeger-tracing.png[Jaeger UI]

== Traces in logs

When the tracing is enabled, the trace information is included in the log messages of all enabled log handlers (see more in the logging https://www.keycloak.org/server/logging[guide]).
It means the format of the log records is changed and may start like follows:

[source, bash]
----
2024-08-05 15:27:07,144 traceId=b636ac4c665ceb901f7fdc3fc7e80154, parentId=d59cea113d0c2549, spanId=d59cea113d0c2549, sampled=true WARN  [org.keycloak.events] ...
----

=== Hide trace info in logs

You can hide tracing information in specific log handlers by specifying their associated {project_name} option `log-<handler-name>-include-trace`, where `<handler-name>` is the name of the log handler.
For instance, to disable trace info in the `console` log, you can turn it off as follows:

<@kc.start parameters="--tracing-enabled=true --log=console --log-console-include-trace=false"/>

NOTE: When you explicitly override the log format for the particular log handlers, the `*-include-trace` options do not have any effect, and no tracing is printed out.

== Sampling

> Sampler decides whether a trace should be discarded or forwarded, effectively managing noise and reducing overhead by limiting the number of collected traces sent to the collector.

Author: Yep, true.

=== Default sampler
The default sampler for {project_name} is `traceidratio`, which controls the rate of trace sampling based on a specified ratio configurable via the `tracing-sampler-ratio` property.

==== Trace ratio
The default trace ratio is `1.0`, which means all traces are sampled - sent to the collector.
The ratio is a floating number in the range `(0,1]`.
For instance, when the ratio is `0.1`, only 10% of the traces are sampled.

WARNING: For a production-ready environment, the trace ratio should be a smaller number to prevent the massive cost of trace store infrastructure and avoid performance overhead.

==== Rationale

The sampler makes its own sampling decisions based on the current ratio of sampled spans, regardless of the decision made on the parent span, as with using the `parentbased_traceidratio` sampler.
The `parentbased_traceidratio` sampler could be the preferred default type, but it would require additional aspects to ensure safety.

There might be potential security risks related to information exposure or DoS attacks - proper HTTP filtering and adequate measures of caller trust would need to be assessed.

> For more information, see the https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#security-considerations[W3C Trace context] document.

Reviewer: IMHO this is a bit vague. Can you be a more specific here describing both the benefits and the risks of the `parentbased_traceidratio`?

== Enable tracing

It is possible to enable exposing traces using the build time option `tracing-enabled` as follows:

<@kc.start parameters="--tracing-enabled=true"/>

By default, the trace exporters send out data in batches, using the `gRPC` protocol and endpoint `+http://localhost:4317+`.
For more tracing settings, see all possible configurations below.

== Development setup

In order to see the captured {project_name} traces, the basic setup with leveraging the https://www.jaegertracing.io/[Jaeger] tracing platform might be used.
For development purposes, the Jaeger-all-in-one can be used to see traces as easily as possible.

NOTE: Jaeger-all-in-one includes the Jaeger agent, an OTel collector, and the query service/UI.
You do not need to install a separated collector. You can directly send the trace data to Jaeger (after enabling OTLP receivers there, see e.g. this https://medium.com/jaegertracing/introducing-native-support-for-opentelemetry-in-jaeger-eb661be8183c[blog] entry for details).

[source, bash]
----

> podman|docker run --name jaeger \

Author: IMHO, these examples improve the UX in a big manner, as users can easily try the new thing out. Even for the downstream, customers might decide whether to use it or not, and the example with the commonly known tool might bring a better perspective for them.

Thus, IMHO, I would not definitely remove it from the upstream docs, and I would not ignore it for the downstream. 
But I'm aware there might be particular policies around mentioning these tools for downstream - and if there are some strict ones, I'm ok to comply with them.

What about only emphasizing in the NOTE that it's only for the development purpose to try it out?

WDYT? @vmuzikar 
cc: @ahus1

> podman|docker run --name jaeger \

Author: The information containing the Medium article was rather reflecting Quarkus [docs](https://quarkus.io/guides/opentelemetry-tracing#jaeger-to-see-traces-option), but I agree that we should avoid having it present in our docs. Yes, only a brief essence can be added.

> podman|docker run --name jaeger \

Reviewer 2: > What about only emphasizing in the NOTE that it's only for the development purpose to try it out?

That works for me (but it's not a blocker, so I approved regardless).

-e COLLECTOR_OTLP_ENABLED=true \
-p 16686:16686 \
-p 4317:4317 \
-p 4318:4318 \
jaegertracing/all-in-one
----

=== Exposed ports

* `:16686` - Jaeger UI
* `:4317` - OpenTelemetry Protocol gRPC receiver (default)
* `:4318` - OpenTelemetry Protocol HTTP receiver

You can visit the Jaeger UI on `+http://localhost:16686/+` to see the tracing information.
The Jaeger UI might look like this with an arbitrary {project_name} trace:

image::jaeger-tracing.png[Jaeger UI]

== Traces in logs

> When tracing is enabled, the trace information is included in the log messages of all enabled log handlers (see more in the logging https://www.keycloak.org/server/logging[guide]).

Reviewer 2: Just a nitpick.
```suggestion
When tracing is enabled, the trace information is included in the log messages of all enabled log handlers (see more in <@links.server id="logging"/>).
```

> When the tracing is enabled, the trace information is included in the log messages of all enabled log handlers (see more in the logging https://www.keycloak.org/server/logging[guide]).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When tracing is enabled, the trace information is included in the log messages of all enabled log handlers (see more in the logging https://www.keycloak.org/server/logging[guide]).
```

It can be useful for associating log events to request execution, which might provide better traceability and debugging.
All log lines originating from the same request will have the same `traceId` in the log.

The log message also contains a `sampled` flag, which relates to the sampling described below and indicates whether the span was sampled - sent to the collector.

The format of the log records may start as follows:

[source, bash]
----
2024-08-05 15:27:07,144 traceId=b636ac4c665ceb901f7fdc3fc7e80154, parentId=d59cea113d0c2549, spanId=d59cea113d0c2549, sampled=true WARN  [org.keycloak.events] ...
----

=== Hide trace info in logs

You can hide tracing information in specific log handlers by specifying their associated {project_name} option `log-<handler-name>-include-trace`, where `<handler-name>` is the name of the log handler.
For instance, to disable trace info in the `console` log, you can turn it off as follows:

<@kc.start parameters="--tracing-enabled=true --log=console --log-console-include-trace=false"/>

> NOTE: When you explicitly override the log format for the particular log handlers, the `*-include-trace` options do not have any effect, and no tracing is printed out.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
NOTE: When you explicitly override the log format for the particular log handlers, the `*-include-trace` options do not have any effect, and no tracing is included.
```
